[Daryl Posnett](https://csus.instructure.com/courses/93920/users/43499)

Yesterday we started going over the basics of Graphics from the introduction and the 2D chapter. We discussed the basics of pixels and colors and discussed the essence of raster and vector graphics. We also started talking a little be about refactoring, discussed some of the SimplePaint code, and briefly discussed the idea of a Lambda in Java. In particular, we outlined the calling syntax. We'll talk more about Lambadas and refactoring later and throughout the course. 

If you missed class be sure to talk to friends and classmates about what we covered. If you're keeping up with the first project and the reading then you're probably fine for this week. I have added the graphics text that we're covering this week to the reading materials.

**Office Hours**

Office hours are today via zoom, link posted later, at the normal class time. You will have a short period of time during office hours. Also, the wait can sometimes go long. I will try to get to everyone in the waiting room. It's best to show up at the start of office hours. Today's office hours will be focused primarily on homework support. Feel free to bring any question, however, if there are a lot of people waiting I may not be able to grant much time to questions not related to the homework.

**80 Column Requirements**

To make this clear, the 80 column requirement refers to the number of columns, of text, _**not the number of lines of text**_. My solution to the homework is about 400 lines of code without reducing it to 80 columns, so I suspect that yours will be longer. And yes, it also applies to all code that is used in the solution. Requiring you to make sure that ALL of the code is limited to 80 columns will help you become more familiar with the code. As discussed in class this requirement is to help train you to write more vertical code which helps you to break up your code  into smaller chunks and aids readability. We'll continue to talk more about this, but, know now that I take this requirement seriously.  I highly recommend that you tell your editor to use spaces instead of tabs so that you don't get bitten by the 8 column tabs that Speed Grader uses.

This announcement is closed for comments