[Daryl Posnett](https://csus.instructure.com/courses/93920/users/43499)

I have posted the video lecture for Thursday. This lecture is a deeper dive into encapsulation as covered in the Martin Robillard book. Following this we will discuss types and interfaces more deeply and start going over design patterns. This will help you think about the Pong project, albeit, in relatively simple terms. After we cover more design patterns we will revert back to discussing graphics and GUI design as we start to build the main project for the course. The reading material for the next few weeks come from the Martin Robillard text, or the free website. I will continue to lecture with the content derived from the book, however, you will only be responsible for the material that overlaps with the freely available material on the Github site. I will continue to inform you of the material covered on each quiz. 

**HW3 and Quiz 1**

Both HW3 and Quiz 1 will be delayed slightly. As a reminder, Quiz 1 is on Chapter 5 of the Java Notes textbook. Expect both to come out sometime this weekend. You will have enough time for both. 

**Next Tuesday's Lecture**

At this point you can expect that we will be back in class as usual next Tuesday. If that changes, I will let you know as soon as possible. 

**Office Hours**

Office hours will resume at their normal time next week. There are no makeup office hours for this week. If you have questions then don't hesitate to send me a Canvas message. 

This announcement is closed for comments